_episodes/07-create-repo.md, before:

---
title: Creating a Repository
teaching: 10
exercises: 0
questions:
- "Where does Git store information?"
objectives:
- "Create a local Git repository."
- "Describe the purpose of the `.git` directory."
keypoints:
- "`git init` initializes a repository."
- "Git stores all of its repository data in the `.git` directory."
---



Once Git is configured, we can start using it.



First make sure we're in `dc_workshop`:

~~~
$ cd ~/dc_workshop
~~~
{: .language-bash}

Then we tell Git to make `dc_workshop` a [repository]({{ page.root }}{% link reference.md %}#repository)
-- a place where Git can store versions of our files:


~~~
$ git init
~~~
{: .language-bash}

It is important to note that `git init` will create a repository that
includes subdirectories and their files---there is no need to create
separate repositories nested within the `dc_workshop` repository, whether
subdirectories are present from the beginning or added later. Also, note
that the creation of the `dc_workshop` directory and its initialization as a
repository are completely separate processes.

If we use `ls` to show the directory's contents,
it appears that nothing has changed:

~~~
$ ls
~~~
{: .language-bash}

But if we add the `-a` flag to show everything,
we can see that Git has created a hidden directory within `dc_workshop` called `.git`:

~~~
$ ls -a
~~~
{: .language-bash}

~~~
.	..	.git
~~~
{: .output}

Git uses this special subdirectory to store all the information about the project, 
including all files and sub-directories located within the project's directory.
If we ever delete the `.git` subdirectory,
we will lose the project's history.

We can check that everything is set up correctly
by asking Git to tell us the status of our project:

~~~
$ git status
~~~
{: .language-bash}
~~~
On branch master

No commits yet

nothing to commit (create/copy files and use "git add" to track)
~~~
{: .output}

If you are using a different version of `git`, the exact
wording of the output might be slightly different.


> ## Removing version control
> > $ rm -rf dc_workshop/.git
> > {: .language-bash}
> >
> > But be careful! Running this command in the wrong directory, will remove
> > the entire Git history of a project you might want to keep. Therefore, always check your current directory using the
> > command `pwd`.


_This lesson was derived from https://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/03-create/index.html_

Commit message:

use example_git dir to start with

_episodes/07-create-repo.md, after:

---
title: Creating a Repository
teaching: 10
exercises: 0
questions:
- "Where does Git store information?"
objectives:
- "Create a local Git repository."
- "Describe the purpose of the `.git` directory."
keypoints:
- "`git init` initializes a repository."
- "Git stores all of its repository data in the `.git` directory."
---



Once Git is configured, we can start using it.



First lets make an example directory to use git in, before we start using for `dc_workshop`:

~~~
$ mkdir ~/example_git/

$ cd ~/example_git/
~~~
{: .language-bash}

Then we tell Git to make `example_git` a [repository]({{ page.root }}{% link reference.md %}#repository)
-- a place where Git can store versions of our files:


~~~
$ git init
~~~
{: .language-bash}

It is important to note that `git init` will create a repository that
includes subdirectories and their files---there is no need to create
separate repositories nested within the `example_git` repository, whether
subdirectories are present from the beginning or added later. Also, note
that the creation of the `example_git` directory and its initialization as a
repository are completely separate processes.

If we use `ls` to show the directory's contents,
it appears that nothing has changed:

~~~
$ ls
~~~
{: .language-bash}

But if we add the `-a` flag to show everything,
we can see that Git has created a hidden directory within `example_git` called `.git`:

~~~
$ ls -a
~~~
{: .language-bash}

~~~
.	..	.git
~~~
{: .output}

Git uses this special subdirectory to store all the information about the project, 
including all files and sub-directories located within the project's directory.
If we ever delete the `.git` subdirectory,
we will lose the project's history.

We can check that everything is set up correctly
by asking Git to tell us the status of our project:

~~~
$ git status
~~~
{: .language-bash}
~~~
On branch master

No commits yet

nothing to commit (create/copy files and use "git add" to track)
~~~
{: .output}

If you are using a different version of `git`, the exact
wording of the output might be slightly different.


> ## Removing version control
> > $ rm -rf example_git/.git
> > {: .language-bash}
> >
> > But be careful! Running this command in the wrong directory, will remove
> > the entire Git history of a project you might want to keep. Therefore, always check your current directory using the
> > command `pwd`.


_This lesson was derived from https://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/03-create/index.html_
